Career XRCade is a project that I worked on while at Meteor Studio. Career XRCade is a VR application (also available on flatscreen) that empowers students to learn about various career oportunities in a fun, engaging, and immersive way. I worked on this project for 2 of my years at Meteor studio. I started by working as a develper on small scripts in the application however I worked hard and was promoted up to a lead where I managed development of one entire exhibit in the application.

## Skills learned / practiced
- C# scripting and more complex OOP
- Shader programming
- Optimizing all parts of the graphics pipeline
- Collaboration / communication
- Leading a small team

## Valuable experiences

### Game Developer Exhibit
After proving my skills working on the Career XRCade: Cybersecurity application, I was tasked with leading the development of the entire game developer exhibit in the Career XRCade: Esports application. I was extremely excited to have the opportunity to lead an exhibit and inject my creativity into the application. I was given 2 additional developers to work under me on the exhibit and a lot of creative freedom. While of course I am biased, I think that the game developer exhibit looked the best and had the most fun and engaging games/interactions. Leading a team under a tight deadline ended up being more challenging that I had anticipated however it was a good challenge that helped me grow as a leader and appreciate my leaders more as a team member. My primary goal as a leader was to communicate openly and effectively with my team members making sure their ideas are heard. I also made sure to let them suggest what they should work on and any asjustmnts to how they think the exhibit should work because I feel that it would give them a sense of ownership in their work and motivation to do quality, efficient work.

### Performance profiling
Since the Career XRCade application was targeting standalone VR and web based flatscreen, our performance budget was pretty tight. As the project grew, the average framerate on the Oculus Quest 2 headset began to dip below the desired 90fps target. This poor framerate is particularly bad when developing VR applications because poor framerates often cause users to experience motion sickness. To remedy this, I began work optimizing the application by carefully examining the Unity profiler and fixing the performance bottlenecks. The first thing that I discovered was that the application had a very large memory footprint. Examining this I was able to discover some assets that had been included in the project that had millions of polygons even though they were small objects (and some weren't even used but we'll get to that). With the performance budget of the oculus quest 2 in mind (~2 million tris rendered at once), I went though all of the problematic assets and either replaced them with game ready assets or took them into blender myself to retopologize and bake new normals. While completing this task, I noticed that some large assets in memory were not even in the actual scene. After digging deeper, I discovered that many asset packs had been imported as a single FBX file containing many models and then just a few of the models from the pack were used. Unfortunatley, Unity always loaded the entire FBX file into memory. Luckily, this was a relatively easy fix, as the asset packs could just be seperated into individial files for each model. These two efforts had a great impact on the memory usage of the application which helped to alleviate frame drops and stuttering, and the reduced poly counts led to an improvement in render times. Next, I went to the main profiler and observed long CPU frametimes and periodic spikes. Using the profiler, I was able to locate a few misbehaving scripts and apply fixes that greatly reduced the CPU frametime. I also applied many more performance fixes that is too much to cover here. Overall my efforts to improve the application's performance resulted in the application, which was running between 30 and 60 fps with many freezes and stutters, running at a smooth 90fps on the Quest 2.